Fastp quality report (#389)
metagenomics/metagenomics-tk: docs/modules/qualityControl.md

# Quality Control

> The quality control module removes adapters, trims and filters short and read long read data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The quality control module removes adapters, trims and filters short and long-read data.
```

> Since quality control is the usual first step in the processing of sequencing data, the Toolkit offers a way to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since quality control is typically the first step in the processing of sequencing data, the Toolkit offers a way to
```

directly download the sequencing data (See `download` flag.). This allows the data to be downloaded in parallel on multiple machines,
as opposed to the usual Nextflow mechanism of downloading input data only on the VM running Nextflow.

> In addition, the quality control module allows human reads to be filtered out and, with Nonpareil, provides diversity estimation of input sequences. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, the quality control module enables the filtering of human reads and, with Nonpareil, provides diversity estimation of input sequences. 
```

## Short Reads

> For short reads we offer a way to only generate a quality report using fastp. This way no additional
> disk space for quality controlled reads is necessary. (See `reportOnly` flag in the configuration file below.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For short reads, we offer a way to generate only a quality report using fastp. This approach eliminates the need for additional disk space to store quality-controlled reads.  (See `reportOnly` flag in the configuration file below.)
```

    ---8<--- "example_params/qc.yml"
    ```

=== "TSV Table short read"

    ```TSV
    ---8<--- "test_data/qc/reads_split.tsv"
    ```

### Output

#### Fastp

`SAMPLE_fastp.json`

> :  Contains quality statistics about the raw reads and the quality controlled reads in json format. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:  Contains quality statistics about the raw reads and the quality controlled reads in JSON format. 
```

`SAMPLE_fastp_summary_after.tsv`

> :  Contains quality statistics about the quality controlled reads in tsv format. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:  Contains quality statistics about the quality controlled reads in TSV format. 
```

`SAMPLE_fastp_summary_before.tsv`

> :  Contains quality statistics about the raw reads in tsv format. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:  Contains quality statistics about the raw reads in TSV format. 
```

`SAMPLE_interleaved.qc.fq.gz`

:  Quality controlled reads

`SAMPLE_report.html`

:  HTML report with plots summarizing the quality of the raw and quality controlled reads.

`test1_unpaired.qc.fq.gz`

: Unpaired reads where the other pair was filtered out due to quality control. 

`test1_unpaired_summary.tsv`

:  TSV file that contains quality statistics about single reads where the other pair was filtered out due to quality control. 

#### KMC 

`SAMPLE.[13|21|71].kmc.json`

K-mer statistics for k-mers of length 13, 21 and 71.

`SAMPLE.[13|21|71].histo.tsv`

K-mer frequency table with the columns `FREQUENCY`, `COUNT` and `SAMPLE`.
`FREQUENCY` is the number of times a specific k-mer appears.
`COUNT` is the number of different k-mers that occur a number of times described by `FREQUENCY`.

## Nanopore Reads

### Input

=== "Command for nanopore data"

    ```
    -entry wOntQualityControl -params-file example_params/qcONT.yml
    ```

=== "Configuration File"

    !!! warning "Warning"
     
        **The configuration file shown here is for demonstration and testing purposes only. 

>           Parameters that should be used in production can be viewed in the quality control section 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          Parameters that should be used in production can be seen in the quality control section 
```

>           of one of the yaml files located in the `default` folder of the Toolkit's Github repository.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          of one of the YAML files located in the `default` folder of the Toolkit's GitHub repository.**
```

    ---8<--- "test_data/qcONT/ont.tsv"
    ```
 
### Output

#### Porechop

`SAMPLE_qc.fq.gz`

: Gzipped quality controlled reads of the format `SAMPLE_qc.fq.gz`.

#### Nanoplot

`NanoStats.tsv`

: Statistics of the output reads, such as quality scores and read length.

`plots`

> : Nanoplot offers a variety of plots that show the quality, length and number of the reads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: NanoPlot offers a variety of plots that show the quality, length and quantity of the reads.
```

## Output

The following output is produced for short and long reads. 

### Nonpareil

`SAMPLE.npa`

: You can read more [here](https://nonpareil.readthedocs.io/en/latest/redundancy.html#output)

`SAMPLE.npc`

: You can read more [here](https://nonpareil.readthedocs.io/en/latest/redundancy.html#output)

`SAMPLE.npl`

: You can read more [here](https://nonpareil.readthedocs.io/en/latest/redundancy.html#output)

`SAMPLE_nonpareil_curves.pdf`

: Nonpareil curves visualize the estimated average coverage for the current sequencing effort.

`SAMPLE_nonpareil_index.tsv`

: Nonpareil statistics including the Nonpareil diversity index. 

### Filtered out Human Sequences

`SAMPLE_filtered.fq.gz`

> : Sequences without human dna.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: Sequences without human DNA.
```

`SAMPLE_removed.fq.gz`

> : Sequences that were classified as human dna. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: Sequences that were classified as human DNA. 
```

`SAMPLE_summary_[after|before].tsv`

> : Statistics of the reads before and after quality control. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: Statistics of reads before and after quality control. 
```
